# Expectations for Myofunctional Therapy

Myofunctional therapy helps patients become aware of and modify habits like mouth breathing, low tongue posture, incorrect chewing or swallowing patterns and compensations that are impacting proper function. A structured program of exercises will be provided to retrain the muscles and improve these habits. It is important that a routine is developed and that these exercises are done twice daily for two weeks (or 28 times total) before moving on to the next set of exercises. Depending on the tier of the program purchased, patients will need to upload brief videos of themselves completing the exercises (at the start and end of the module) to the dashboard for assessment by our myofunctional therapist. Because the retraining of muscles is involved, the quality of the exercises (correct form, limiting compensations, and looking in a mirror when suggested) is just as important as quantity (number of times exercises are done). Any therapy program requires commitment and long-term dedication, however, sometimes the need for a pause in the program is unavoidable. If this occurs, try to minimize the amount of time and go back to the prior week completed and redo those exercises before moving forward. Exercises become more difficult and adequate muscle tone must be built from the previous week's exercises before attempting the next set of exercises. It is important that too much time does not pass during any pauses, or you may not achieve optimal results. It is also important that an awareness is present surrounding nasal breathing, tongue posture and compensations during the day and night where applicable. This awareness will need to extend after completing this program or old habits may resurface.
